Fixing SCHED_IDLE

The Linux kernel scheduler (or the task scheduler) is a complicated beast and a
lot of effort goes into improving it during every kernel release cycle. The 5.4
kernel release includes few improvements to the existing SCHED_IDLE
scheduling policy that can help users to improve the scheduling latency of
their high-priority (interactive) tasks if they use the SCHED_IDLE policy for
the lowest-priority (background) tasks.

Scheduling classes and policies
The Linux kernel scheduler implements many "scheduling classes", an extensible
hierarchy of modules, and each class may further encapsulate
"scheduling policies" that are handled by the scheduler core in a
policy-independent way.



















The scheduling classes are described below in descending priority order; the
Stop class has the highest priority, and Idle class has the lowest.

The Stop scheduling class is a special class that is used internally by the
kernel. It doesn't implement any scheduling policy and no user task ever gets
scheduled with it. The Stop class is, instead, a mechanism to force a CPU to
stop running everything else and perform a specific task. As this is the
highest-priority class, it can preempt everything else and nothing ever
preempts it. It is used by one CPU to stop another in order to run a specific
function, so it is only available on SMP systems. The Stop class creates a
single, per-CPU kernel thread (or kthread) named migration/N, where N is the
CPU number. This class is used by the kernel for task migration, CPU hotplug,
RCU, ftrace, clock events, and more.

The Deadline scheduling class implements a single scheduling policy,
SCHED_DEADLINE, and it serves the highest-priority user tasks in the system. It
is used for tasks with hard deadlines, like video encoding and decoding. The
task with the earliest deadline is served first under this policy. The policy
of a task can be set to SCHED_DEADLINE using the sched_setattr() system call by
passing three parameters: the run time, deadline, and period.

To ensure deadline-scheduling guarantees, the kernel must prevent situations
where the current set of SCHED_DEADLINE threads is not schedulable within the
given constraints. The kernel thus performs an admittance test when setting or
changing SCHED_DEADLINE policy and attributes. This admission test calculates
whether the change can be successfully scheduled; if not, sched_setattr() fails
with the error EBUSY.

The POSIX realtime (or RT) scheduling class comes after the deadline class and
is used for short, latency-sensitive tasks, like IRQ threads. This is a
fixed-priority class that schedules higher-priority tasks before lower-priority
tasks. It implements two scheduling policies: SCHED_FIFO and SCHED_RR. In
SCHED_FIFO, a task runs until it relinquishes the CPU, either because it blocks
for a resource or it has completed its execution. In SCHED_RR (round-robin), a
task will run for the maximum time slice; if the task doesn't block before the
end of its time slice, the scheduler will put it at the end of the round-robin
queue of tasks with the same priority and select the next task to run. The
priority of the tasks under the realtime policies range from 1 (low) to 99
(high).

The CFS (completely fair scheduling) class hosts most of the user tasks; it
implements three scheduling policies: SCHED_NORMAL, SCHED_BATCH, and
SCHED_IDLE. A task under any of these policies gets a chance to run only if no
other tasks are enqueued in the deadline or realtime classes (though by default
the scheduler reserves 5% of the CPU for CFS tasks regardless). The scheduler
tracks the virtual runtime (vruntime) for all tasks, runnable and blocked. The
lower a task's vruntime, the more deserving the task is for time on the
processor. CFS accordingly moves low-vruntime tasks toward the front of the
scheduling queue.

The priority of a task is calculated by adding 120 to its nice value, which
ranges from -20 to +19. The priority of the task is used to set the weight of
the task, which in turn affects the vruntime of the task; the lower the nice
value, the higher the priority. The task's weight will thus be higher, and its
vruntime will increase more slowly as the task runs.

The SCHED_NORMAL policy (called SCHED_OTHER in user space) is used for most of
the tasks that run in a Linux environment, like the shell. The SCHED_BATCH
policy is used for batch processing by non-interactive tasks — tasks that
should run uninterrupted for a period of time and hence are normally scheduled
only after finishing all the SCHED_NORMAL activity. The SCHED_IDLE policy is
designed for the lowest-priority tasks in the system; these tasks get a chance
to run only if there is nothing else to run. Though, in practice, even in the
presence of other SCHED_NORMAL tasks a SCHED_IDLE task will get some time to
run (around 1.4% for a task with a nice value of zero). This policy isn't
widely used currently and efforts are being made to improve how it works.

Last is the Idle scheduling class (which should not be confused with the
SCHED_IDLE scheduling policy). This is the lowest-priority scheduling class;
like the Stop class, it doesn't manage any user tasks and so doesn't implement
a policy. It only keeps a single per-CPU kthread which is named swapper/N,
where N is the CPU number. These kthreads are also called the "idle threads"
and aren't visible to user space. These threads are responsible for saving
system power by putting the CPUs into deep idle states when there is no work to
do.

Scheduling classes in the kernel
The scheduling classes are represented by struct sched_class in the kernel
source code:

    struct sched_class {
	const struct sched_class *next;
	void (*enqueue_task) (struct rq *rq, struct task_struct *p, int flags);
	void (*dequeue_task) (struct rq *rq, struct task_struct *p, int flags);
	struct task_struct *(*pick_next_task) (struct rq *rq, struct task_struct *prev, 
			    struct rq_flags *rf);
	/* many fields omitted */
    };

This structure mostly consists of function pointers (callbacks) to
class-specific implementations that are called by the scheduler core in a
class-independent manner. The classes are kept in a singly linked list in
descending order of their priorities; the head node points to the Stop
scheduling class (highest priority) and the last node in the list points to the
Idle class (lowest priority).

The Linux kernel calls schedule() when it needs to pick a new task to run on
the local CPU, which further calls pick_next_task() to find the next task.
pick_next_task() traverses the list of scheduling classes, with the help of the
for_each_class() macro, to find the highest-priority scheduling class that has
a task available to run. Once a task is found, it is returned to the caller,
which then runs it on the local CPU. There should always be a task available to
run in the Idle class, which will run only if there is nothing else to run.

SCHED_IDLE improvements
The CFS scheduler tries to be fair to all tasks by giving more CPU time to the
higher-priority tasks as compared to the lower-priority tasks. It normally
doesn't provide special treatment to tasks based on their scheduling policy,
for example tasks running under the SCHED_NORMAL and SCHED_IDLE policies are
managed in the same way. They are all kept in the same CFS run queues, the load
and utilization of the CPUs change in the same way for all the tasks, and the
PELT signal and CPU-frequency changes are impacted similarly by all tasks. The
only differentiating factor is the priority (derived from the nice value) of
the tasks, which affects the weight of the tasks.

The weight of a task defines how the load and utilization of the CPU will
change because of that task. For this reason, we don't see a lot of SCHED_IDLE
policy-related code in the CFS scheduler. As the SCHED_IDLE policy tasks have
the lowest priority, they automatically get scheduled for the least amount of
time. Also, since there aren't many known users of the SCHED_IDLE policy in the
Linux community, no one attempted to improve it since it was first introduced
in Linux 2.6.23.

When a newly woken-up task is available to run, the scheduler core finds the
target run queue (i.e. a CPU to run it on) by calling the select_task_rq()
callback of the respective scheduling class. This callback returns the CPU
where the task should be enqueued. Once the task is enqueued there, the
scheduler checks if that task should preempt the currently running task on that
CPU by calling the check_preempt_curr() callback of the respective scheduling
class.

Until now, the SCHED_IDLE policy was getting special treatment only in the
check_preempt_curr() callback, where a currently running SCHED_IDLE task will
be immediately preempted by a newly woken-up SCHED_NORMAL task. But this
preemption will only happen if the newly woken-up task is enqueued on a CPU
that is running a SCHED_IDLE task currently. As there was no special handling
of the SCHED_IDLE policy in the select_task_rq() callback, there was no
specific effort made to enqueue the newly woken-up SCHED_NORMAL task on a CPU
running a SCHED_IDLE task.

Normally, the scheduler tries to spread tasks across the available CPUs by
searching for an idle CPU for newly woken-up tasks. The 5.4 kernel contains a
patch set that makes the necessary changes to the CFS scheduler's
select_task_rq() callback to queue tasks more aggressively on CPUs that are
running only SCHED_IDLE tasks, even if a few CPUs are currently idle. There are
two separate code paths in the CFS select_task_rq() callback: the slow path and
the fast path. The slow path is mostly executed for newly forked tasks, where
it tries to find the optimal CPU to run the task on. The fast path, instead, is
taken for existing tasks that have become runnable again; it tries to find a
target CPU (an idle CPU if possible) as soon as possible even if it is not the
optimal one.

Both these code paths were updated by the new patch set to consider a CPU that
is running only SCHED_IDLE tasks as equivalent to an idle CPU. The scheduler
now prefers to queue the newly woken-up tasks on CPUs with only SCHED_IDLE
activity; the newly queued task will immediately preempt the currently running
SCHED_IDLE task when check_preempt_curr() is called. This reduces the
scheduling latency for the newly queued task as compared to selecting a fully
idle CPU, as we don't need to bring an idle CPU out of its deep idle state,
which normally takes a few milliseconds to complete.

The results of this change

This patch set was initially tested with rt-app on an arm64 octa-core HiKey
platform, where all the CPUs change frequency together. Rt-app is a test
application that starts multiple periodic threads in order to simulate a
real-time periodic load. For this test, eight SCHED_OTHER tasks and five
SCHED_IDLE tasks were created. The tasks weren't bound to any particular CPU
and could be queued anywhere by the scheduler. The SCHED_NORMAL tasks executed
(busy loops) for 5333µs out of a period of 7777µs, while the SCHED_IDLE tasks
kept on running forever. The idea was to check whether the SCHED_NORMAL tasks
were being scheduled together (thus preempting each other) or if they were able
to preempt SCHED_IDLE tasks instead. The result showed that the average
scheduling latency (wu_lat field in rt-app results) for the SCHED_NORMAL tasks
reduced to 102µs after the patch set was applied, down from 1116µs without the
patch set; that was a reduction of 90% in scheduling latency for the
SCHED_NORMAL tasks, which looks quite encouraging.

Further testing showed that the average scheduling latency of a SCHED_NORMAL
task, on the above-mentioned arm64 platform is 64µs when it preempts a
SCHED_IDLE task, 177µs when it runs on a shallow-idle (no cluster idle) CPU,
and 307µs when it runs on a deep-idle (cluster idle) CPU. The same behavior can
be observed with the kernel function tracer; the traces are shown below with
help of the KernelShark tool. First, the output from the 5.3 kernel:

If you look closely at the above figure, you can see that occasionally, for
long periods of time, a few CPUs were running a single task (solid single-color
lines) without being preempted by another task. The long-running tasks are the
SCHED_IDLE tasks which should ideally be preempted by the SCHED_NORMAL tasks,
but that wasn't happening then.

The results from the 5.4 kernel are different:

If you look closely at the above figure, you can see that the pattern is quite
consistent now. The SCHED_IDLE tasks are preempted by the SCHED_NORMAL tasks as
soon as one is available to run, which then runs for 5333µs and then gives the
CPU back to a SCHED_IDLE task. This is exactly the behavior this patch set was
meant to create.

Other applications
Recently, Song Liu was trying to solve a problem seen on servers at Facebook.
The servers running latency-sensitive workloads usually weren't fully loaded
for various reasons, including disaster readiness. The machines running
Facebook's interactive workloads (referred as the main workload) have a lot of
spare CPU cycles that they would like to use for opportunistic side jobs like
video encoding. However, Song's experiments showed that the side workload has a
strong impact on the latency of main workload. Song was asked to try the
SCHED_IDLE patch set and he found that it solved the problems he was facing to
a great extent; though he tested an earlier version of the patch set where only
the fast path was updated.

Another potential user of this work is the Android operating system, which has
knowledge about the importance of a task for the current user's experience
ranging from "background" (not important) to "top-app" (most important). The
SCHED_IDLE policy can potentially be used for all the background tasks as that
would increase the probability of finding an idle CPU for top-app tasks by
preempting the background tasks.

Clearly this work has a lot of potential, and more mainstream products should
be using the SCHED_IDLE policy. Though there may be a need for more SCHED_IDLE
policy-specific optimizations in the CFS scheduler for that. One such
optimization is under discussion right now on the kernel mailing list, where I
am trying to be more aggressive in selecting a SCHED_IDLE CPU in both the slow
and fast paths of the CFS scheduler. Also, improvements can be made to the CFS
load balancer, which doesn't give any special treatment to the SCHED_IDLE CPUs
currently and rather attempts to spread the tasks to all the CPUs; that is
future work, though.
